And you ask about style of teaching.
Right up front in every class, unless I forgot to, I would describe to them the level of expectation
One that you'd be in class, one that you'd be on time, and one that, hopefully, that you would be prepared.
Also, in the first lecture, too, I would try to at least my view on how one gets prepared for university work as far as the time spent
I know it sounds corny, but the day you take your notes, you review your notes that day, not three days later, that you've studied the text before you come to Clannis, not after.
I'm not saying many of them did it, but this is what I would expect of them.
strongly suggest in the first day or two, I said, when we get into the end of the semester, you've not done well.
You wait until the week before the term is over and not come in and say, oh, Dr. Bayless, what must I do to be saved?
Because salvation will have passed you by by then.
I said, I'm really not going to be sympathetic nor interested.
Now, after the first exam, you come by and you talk with me, and I make my suggestion, and I feel that you're doing what you need to be doing, but do not wait until the last week and suddenly decide, oh, gee, I'm about to flunk this course, and I go cry on his shoulder.
I said, I won't be sympathetic to you.
Compare, in those first years, compare A&M students to what you learned about the Citadel students.
Well, let's see, I taught at UT as a TA.
for four years or so, three, and then I went to Citadel and then here.
Probably generally UT students were a little better prepared.
Citadel, not so prepared.
A&M started somewhere in between.
I had obviously very good students and mediocre and bad.
You know, I hear people talk that this professor is hard and that professor is easy and this school is hard and this school is easy, whatever it is in these journals that people talk about.
My own naive feeling was, wherever the student went to school, he or she could do well if they wanted to, whether it's at UT or the Citadel or at Texas A&M or TCU or wherever it may be.
And I think my comment now is going to be common.
I remember very well one student said it all after he gave his paper back, pretty heavily marked out.
He said, well, Professor Bayless, this is not an English class, it's a history class.
And you marked all this grammar.
And I said, yes I did, because I expect you to be able to express yourself with this course.
And I think when you get out of the Citadel and you're employed, that employer's not going to wonder whether you were this major or that major.
He wants to know how you can express yourself and how you can communicate.
I never did feel that our A&M students were doing that much better or that much worse than these other institutions.
Did you, in your first months here, did you find much difference in the military style of the students here compared to the Citadel?
everybody was uniformed as they were here, but each class section was a military unit.
And there was a squad leader who marched into the class and when you walked in, he called the class to attention and after you nodded, then he said, seats.
And so that was much like West Point or Annapolis.
and also at the Citadel, all faculty wore uniform.
And your military rank at the Citadel was?
Well, it was mixed.
As a retired naval officer, I could have worn
the uniform, the Navy uniform.
In fact the Registrar did, he was the only one who did.
But I went out and bought a used Army uniform from a guy who was leaving, I learned about.
And you have two ranks.
I was an assistant professor of history and I was a second lieutenant.
in the South Carolina Unorganized Militia.
And if you look at the acronym, what does it come out?
S-C-U-M.
But all faculty, like the department heads, were usually lieutenant colonels and colonels.
However, when I went there, major anger was the department head, because the other one had recently died, and he was soon promoted to lieutenant colonel.
You had both patrol rank in the Citadel and military rank.
So it was more military there than here.
Much more.
How did you and Mary Evelyn become a part of the department's community, social life activities?
In which place?
Here.
Just one other comment about the Citadel.
I should have said it earlier.
At the Citadel,
One of the first things you did was get your cards.
And here's Garland, Baylor, Sutton, and everybody had their cards.
And on Sunday afternoon the department head called on his faculty members.
And outside your door you had a pedestal with a basket of the cards in case you were not home.
And sometimes you didn't mind being home and sometimes you made a point not to be home.
but the department and his wife would call on you, and they would each leave their cards.
But as indicated earlier, since we were living in faculty housing, we immediately had a support group, and that was very nice.
Here, and I'm sorry to say, I think it's changed as we've gotten bigger, but it was very easy to integrate social with the department here for many, many, many, many years.
I always felt the Department of History at Extendium was a socially and economically and academically compatible group.
We had very, very little personal conflicts or personality things.
Sure, we'd get hacked at one another occasionally on something, but always you felt that we supported each other.
We'd hear new facts that come in, we'd meet them, we'd help them get a Senate.
set up we'd take them to their place or show them how to get there or or whatever and you you tend to take an interest in your new colleagues not just an academic interest but a personal and social interest i'm not sure in fact i think that it pretty much died before i retired in 86. did people help you all when you arrived uh and i remember several that we helped
Do you remember some early parties that you all went to or receptions or picnics?
Did the Steens have any?
I don't remember the Steens having much.
The Nances did.
And the way the Nances tended to be more social than the Steens.
Did any faculty member give you advice about anything in the early years?
Not particularly as you asked.
Someone else may have told you this.
Was it, let's see, which election party?
Was President in place 60 or 62?
60.
Kennedy, Nixon.
Were you there at someone's party?
The whole department was there.
And someone put evergreen or ever, that 190 proof alcohol in the punch.
And several senior people got sick.
One never got home.
I remember whose house it was.
I can visualize the house, but it was an election party for the election in 1960.
And some unknown person
Spike the punch.
But no one either in the department or from some other department told y'all, here are some things you need to know, don't do this?
I can't remember.
You weren't told to join a certain church or not to attend?
No, I don't remember anything like that.
Well, what groups did y'all quickly associate with
separate from the department?
Me and the church went to A&M Methodist Church.
Did you join it?
Yeah.
Okay.
We later moved to First Methodist downtown.
I was in 67 when we made the change, but we went to A&M Methodist when we came in 56.
Anything else?
Then after we built that house, second house on the... No, we built the house on Briar Oaks.
is when we moved to First Methodist downtown.
That's interesting on the question
As a new faculty member, I really don't remember them saying.
Don't do this.
Don't do that.
Okay.
Dr. Steen left in 58.
58.
And do you remember anything in the department, any shifts or any events when Dr. Nance took over?
How did you all feel?
Before Ralph left.
I said, Rapp, are you going to take anybody with you?
And he looked at me and said, I'm not going to take any of these criminals anywhere.
Now whether he had a chance or wanted to, I don't know.
That was on his copy.
After he left, the Milton McCain Department had, as I've indicated earlier, Milton was a little bit tougher, sterner, not quite as approachable.
was there any as far as you know any departmental involvement in the selection of dr nance not to my knowledge of course remember this is i'm here two years in very junior and i don't remember do you remember any reaction by the senior faculty in his selection and as far as you did hearts or al or tom
As far as y'all were aware, who made the decision that he would be the department head?
It's just before Hubert, one year.
All I know is where the dean was said that he is the new department.
I'm sure that he must have obviously visited with the president.
There wasn't a party or anything.
It was there to
Then Dr. Hubert came as the dean in the fall of 59 and Rutter is the new president.
Do you recall any particular changes then?
Within the department?
Or within A&M?
When did the department move over to Nagel Hall?
Because they're there, I know, in the fall of 59.
Was Steen?
No, Steen, we were still in academics.
So it must have been in that summer of 58, 59.
You came in August.
Of 59.
And we were already in Nagel.
It must have been that spring.
See, I usually remember walking into the office and not getting anything, how it was set up.
But once we got over into Nagel, of course you know in Nagel, we had no telephones.
And I don't remember the first, but at the end of each hall, Wesley, what's his name, in Poli-Sci, Wesley?
Tell me the phone was in his office just outside his office.
And if it rang, then you'd have to run down to the governor's room and go answer it.
When y'all moved to Nagel, who decided who got what office?
because I had a very nice office and I was sharing it with the former department head, Dr. Gammon.
It was one of those larger offices.
We had two desks, one for me and one for Dr. Gammon, and he showed up occasionally.
And you were right at the head of the stairway.
And there were a number of new, you came in 56,
And the department grew a little each year, didn't it?
Of course, I had a big influx in 56.
Was Frazier here when you came?
Yes.
So he must have been added in 59.
Frazier and Wines.
I think they were both added in 58.
And I was the only...
I don't remember about in 57.
I was the only new person in 59 in history.
There was another new... Was Benton here when you came?
Yes, yes.
Describe, describe Dr. Benton.
Wilburn.
Since we were a joint history and government, history and public side, history and government, a number of the faculty
in the department were exclusively government, though there were some in history who also taught government.
Claude Hall, for example, you know, they always taught a section of government.
I never did.
Did you?
Gene Benton.
He was head of the SMU.
Did he come directly from SMU?
Gene Benton was
They usually were probably one of the characters in the government side of this.
Tall, lanky, very competent, except he drove his students nuts.
I don't know if this is fair to say to them or not.
interest enough, where he just ran into his wife the first time, and they were forever married, I was somewhere, and I finally recognized her.
I'd seen her, I didn't know anything about her.
What was his name?
Blue Book Benton.
We all used Blue Book.
I'm not sure why he was designated as that.
Rather demanding, but he tended to, I think, read his lectures more than we always did.
Students used to try to avoid Gene, but I think once they got in with him,
based on what they heard, once they got in with him, they tended to stay with him.
And I've known several who would take several courses with Gene.
Of course, I had that opportunity later when I was a senior department advisor before they got their divorce.
And I could tend to see where students would tend to, who they would want to get, who they're trying to avoid.
I personally like Gene.
The one time I was chairman of the Liberal Arts Council, and Gene was on there, and I always found it amusing we were highly starved until Gene would make a motion to adjourn.
I don't think he liked committee meetings.
One other person on this is strictly a version of it.
It was Dick Ballinger on that same Liberal Arts Council.
And as an English prof, it took him more words to say something that most people that I knew.
But again, I liked it.
We used to have calls and see it quite often.
Of course, the bigger changes obviously came when we started out with really, really a rapid growth.
I guess it was 78.
Have you identified when we were doing that 15% or 20% a year?
Oh, it was earlier than that.
We ran it, what, through 85, 86?
Yeah, yeah.
But let's stay with the stable years first.
Describe the department in Nagel.
Describe the physical setting for the department.
What else was in Nagel, and where was history in government?
Well, economics for a while was on the first floor.
We shared second and part of three, part of three with geography, because there were only three people in geography then.
Ed Duran.
Skipper Schleselman.
But he had his office over in academic and social dean.
But the dean's office was on the second floor of Nagel that first year.
In the middle, right there.
Was that before they moved over too?
Uh-huh.
Okay, that's right.
And then who was the other guy?
I can't, NGRV, I can't remember.
I can picture him coming up, down the corner, up across from mine.
No air control, obviously.
When did air conditioning come?
A long time after that.
After that.
I remember the number.
It cost $500,000 to build Academic Building in 1912.
Is that when it was built?
I think so.
And it cost more than that to air condition it in whatever year.
I do not know the cost on building Naval, but I heard the cost to air condition it.
No telephones, no elevators.
completely in the side.
I'd have knee surgery and also third floor and going up those stairs on crutches was not very much fun.
Let's see, what about parking?
Where did you park?
Well, remember initially there was no fee to park.
Then it went to fifty cents and three dollars into five dollars.
A year?
Then it skyrocketed and we were all complaining that here is our job.
Well, at one time we parked on the
In academia, our parking was on the, what direction is that towards Harrington?
East side.
East side, there was a parking garage where Harrington is.
Where the parking lot outside of Naco was and is still there, and that's where we parked.
When I was in B Hall, which I think is the name of Richmond, where my first office was, we parked where Harrington is now in that parking garage.
We shared the Nago parking lot with physics, when they were in the physics building, and with economics and geography.
Was anyone else in that Nago for a while?
Economics?
Journalism was in the basement.
In the basement, that's right.
In the department, was there a coffee pot?
Where did the department drink coffee in the 60s?
MSC?
I don't ever remember a coffee pot in any other place.
I don't think Dr. Nance allowed it.
And I guess to me it's sort of a sad thing.
We'd go to MSC at 9.30, 10.30 in the morning when it was appropriate.
And I'm not sure that people do that anymore, but I think an awful lot of our
understanding of each other took place there.
Or later over to Visa.
Every once in a while I run into George Carter.
In fact, I saw him at the airport.
We didn't talk, but I saw him there.
And he still laments that
not meeting over from economic, from poli-sci, from history, from what you first referred to, predominantly from history, but later expanded and whoever showed up.
Describe how you feel, if you feel so, was there a kind of a community feeling on campus then?
With friends and other departments and other colleges?
Very much so.
I was there to always look at and embarrass people.
I mean, well, you know so and so in what department.
I said, no, I know somebody else in that department.
Because I thought, at least from my view, not only liberal arts and the sciences as well, maybe not quite as much as engineering, because they're a little bit alternate, but there was this feeling of, I would say, comradeship, collegiality, whatever word you want, not only within history and economics
polysci and English, but all the way to geosciences and science, maybe a little bit of engineering.
They did not tend, didn't see me in engineering, in MSC or in species that I can remember.
Do you?
I mean in ag.
That's right.
From the other areas, pretty much so.
In your first years here, was there anyone in the department or elsewhere to whom you turned for advice?
What do I do about this?
How do I solve this problem?
Well, maybe I'm naive and didn't have too many problems.
I did talk to Horace Bass some since he'd been around.
Paul was not much older in the department than me, so he probably more so within those who came at the same time.
Ashcroft and Taylor, and later you.
Talked to Frazier a good bit, not so much for advice, just to visit with.
Ryan, because we were in the reserve together there for a while, so I came to visit with him a good bit.
Now, there were faculty nicknames that the students created.
Share as many as you can recall.
Well, I've always wondered if I had one and didn't know it.
Oh, I never heard it.
I never heard.
I never heard one from you.
I mentioned Gene.
Blue Book, Notes Nance.
Because?
They tended to read his lecture.
Harris, he had a nickname.
What was his first name?
It wasn't Bill Harris.
I cannot think of it.
I can't remember his first name either.
Lloyd Taylor had several machine gun, high pockets, Abbey lead.
As far as I know, he had at least three that I knew of.
And each of those, machine gun was because they thought he talked fast.
Rapidity, no notes, just unloaded.
High pockets because he always wore penny loafers, white socks, and gray pants.
I guess to somebody's view, his pants were short enough to walk along and see his white socks.
I never saw anything on him except white socks.
And then the Ivy League, because they thought that his dress style... His dress style, in fact, he was from the East, though Lehigh was not an Ivy League.
I don't think they knew where he was from.
Do you think of any other?
Did Alan Ashcraft have one?
I don't remember.
Claude Hall, I don't remember one.
Tom Miller, I don't.
Tom Duncan, John Duncan.
I don't remember one for him.
He was another senior man I mentioned before.
What was his specialty?
It was US, wasn't it?
It was US.
John was also one who thought he was not given a fair shake by the administration.
Like he was probably more bitter because of his feeling on that.
And I don't know whether it's right or wrong about his feeling.
I just know that he felt bitter and hurt that he was not recognized.
How did you come to understand and what were your feelings about Aggie traditions?
Yale practice and all.
You know, coming from the city with a heavy military tradition, I was not surprised by some.
And I had been already
the word is not indoctrinate, but at Arkansas A&M at Monticello in the B-12 program, we ended up with students from all over the Southwest Conference, including Aggies.
And it was from those who were at Monticello, Arkansas, that I learned about Babbo bombs.
And I'm sure some old Aggies told you about those, where you take a can of Babbo
cut a hole in the top, put a 5 or 6 inch firecracker in it, set it off, throw it in someone's room, hold the door, and I cannot imagine cleaning up the stuff from an exploded can.
The other was drowned out.
And again, this is not germane to Texas A&M, but to our A&M, one of the Texas A&M Aggies decided to drown out one of his buddies in a modified way
The doors were made out of ledge stone, and he was on the third floor, opened a window in the hall, trying to walk along the ledge stone with one hand and carrying a bucket in the other to the next window to throw it in on his buddy, and the process fell three stories.
Fortunately, he hit some bushes that messed up, mad cuts on his head.
and messed up his right foot and ankle to where he had to be discharged from the Marine Corps.
But talking with others who've made any of this is how it was indoctrinated.
And I guess being indoctrinated to the average tradition was rather gradual on my part, but it came to be a real reality when
As Director of Academic Services, I had a graduate student in education from North Carolina who was working for me, and she was telling me how corny she thought many of our traditions were.
But within the year, she was the most dedicated Aggie that I've ever known.
And there's something in the
perhaps even unobtrusive indoctrination that happens to people.
And I've seen many like her change, that when they come here, they couldn't wait to leave because they thought that so much that was done here was corny or hokey or whatever.
And I guess as much as anything, what I miss out today, miss today, or I did before, is the whipping out.
which is almost a thing of the past.
And I guess in part because the Corps is now such a small part.
But in that transition from all Corps to Corps non-regs to women, I think even for a long time after the Corps became non-compulsory, others picked up on it as well.
When you first arrived, did you have any guesstimate as to how long you were going to be here?
Not to follow this.
So you didn't have any plan to either stay or not to stay?
Not to stay.
I just came.
Did you remember?
As you well know, for much of the, I guess, 60s, early 70s, we had an enormous turnover.
And a lot of those who...
either got better offers or just couldn't adapt to what they perceived to be our system, especially the headship.
We simply moved on.
Do you remember your feeling...